Good morning. It is morning. It's bright
and early on Monday morning, squat day.
And if you've been following, you'll
know I've been breaking my rules every
single week. I keep on going heavy. And
I keep on saying I'm going to go heavy
week, light week, heavy week, light
week. Well, now I'm actually forcing
myself to do that. I'm going to give you
some tips with different squat
variations. I'm using a safety bar squat
today. So, this morning I got my
preworkout. Check this out. Stimfree
stimulant. It's not very stimulating.
How ironic. any how I quite like this
one and I'm only joking saying that it's
not very stimulating. It is very
stimulating but it just doesn't have
caffeine in it which I don't mind
caffeine but I just get a ton of that.
So I have so many coffees and during the
session a lot of the gym members and
staff will be messaging and bringing
over coffee so I get plenty of caffeine
for the day. So having so much caffeine
plus a pre-workout is just too much you
know but sometimes stuff like this so
this is uh Transparent Labs. Now I'll
tell you what I like about Transparent
Labs. It's what Thor uses. So whenever
I'm over in Iceland, I use his
supplements and I feel great. So that's
why I'm ordering this now in Australia
because they do deliver in Australia. So
that's me getting ready for my squats.
Now check this out. I'm doing safety bar
squats. I hate safety bar, but it's a
necessary evil and I'm going to do it
until I love it. Let me explain. If you
at home have ever tried a safety bar,
you'll probably be able to relate to
this. The first time you try it, you
hate it and then you stop using it.
That's been me for so damn long until I
came to the point where I had so much
discomfort in my shoulders and elbows
from so much squatting and heavy bench
pressing that holding a barbell on my
back for two sessions a week just became
so damn painful and it just stopped me
from being able to progress in all of my
movements. So I had to I was forced to
use a safety bar. Now the first time I
did it, it really sucked. I'll tell you
the biggest reason why it sucks is
because you're used to squatting really
heavy weights with a barbell on your
back in this position and then all of a
sudden you start using the safety bar
and you probably notice you'll start
like breaking form in this upper back
position. You know why you break form
there? It's the same reason why you
break form there in a front squat is
because you don't have your hands behind
here to retract your scapula. Pull your
shoulder blades together. When you pull
your shoulder blades together using your
midback muscles to hold your upper back
rigid. So, I'm going to show you the
tricks that I like to use so that I
don't fail so hard in the upper back
when I do my safety bar. So, check this
out.
I need to have a quick session. So, I'm
going to talk to you about quick
sessions as well. So, when I do the
safety bar, there's a few things that I
like to consider. So, you can do this
with different stances. You can do like
how you do high bar, low bar, elevated
heels, all of that stuff. I'm using my
normal flat sold shoes like I would use
for my low bar squats because that's
what I want to be pushing right now is
my low bar squat and I want this to
carry over to it as much as possible.
But watch the things that I do. So
firstly with the handles I push them up.
Right?
So the first thing that wants to do is
go right. So don't hold on to these
handles.
Okay? That's going to cause that big
ugly prawn like squat. Don't do that.
So, push up.
So, first time I do it, the first week
of the program, I hate it. It just feels
so uncomfortable. But that's because
it's just not as strong as my regular
squat. And for me, I now understand the
process. So, what I'm going to do today
is not give myself a hard time and think
I have to be as strong as what I am on
the squat. So, last session I squatted
270 kg. So, for triples I should be able
to do 250.
But I'm not going to go anywhere near
that. And here's the rule. If you're
trying a new technique the first week,
your body's familiarizing itself with a
new pattern. Don't go heavy. Go
conservative. Because I promise you if
you do that and refine the movement and
don't even consider that it's supposed
to be really heavy session. Just think
of it as a movement refining session.
Watch what happens. Week two
improvements that you get in my opinion.
This is purely anecdotal in my
experience I should say. Week one sucks.
Week two is like huh that felt way
better than last week. How strange. And
then week three the same thing happens
again. And then all of a sudden you are
familiar with the movement and it starts
becoming comfortable to the point where
you're now understanding you know the
difference. It's like how I have a low
bar squat PB and a high bar squat PB and
a front squat PB and then you have
safety bar PBS. It's not always about
performing a one rep max. It's also
about, you know, I do PBs cuz it's kind
of like tracking your progress along the
way. So I'm always working towards my
eight rep max PB. No one does sevens.
Six rep max. Five, four, three, two, and
one rep max. But I'm not going to be
testing my heavy single in this for a
very long time.
>> That's delicious. Tropical punch. I love
a stimulant. It's not very stimulating.
I'm joking, of course. Next thing that
I'm going to talk to you about is today.
I don't have much time for a big
session. I'm holding a oneweek long
seminar. So, I came in here at 7:30 this
morning to start my session. I've got to
do a post as well before my seminar
starts. Hang on. You got to switch on
nice comfortable squat stance. Check out
my stance. This is quite comfortable to
have your toes pointed out. But in my
opinion, it allows you to sit in the
bottom position nicely, but it doesn't
add tension. So, what I like to do is
kind of not completely straight, but
straighten my feet a little bit. And
what this does, so I straighten my feet.
It's like the bench press using a
bulldog grip. I internally rotate my
hands and then externally rotate my
shoulders. internally rotate my feet and
then externally rotate my hips.
I do that for my low bar squats as well.
And whenever I introduce that to people,
they always say it feels tight in the
hips at the bottom. And it's like, okay,
but did it feel weak? It's like, well,
no, it just felt tight.
It pinched the fat pad. One sec. Let me
get some more blue plates. Yeah. So, as
I was saying with the stance, whenever I
introduce it to people, they say it
makes it feel tight at the bottom. Now,
tight is one of the most common cues
that you hear power lifters scream out
to each other, get tight, get tight.
Tight equals strong. Loose equals weak.
There's my clip. Right. So, what
powerliffters are trying to do, this is
this is called bracing. So, bracing
isn't just limited to holding your
breath and flexing your abs. You want
tension through your entire body,
tension in your hips, tension in your
upper back, and of course, you finish
that off with the brace and the breath
hold. And that's what it means to get
tight. And in my opinion, this stance
where it's not completely straight like
you're on train tracks, but you know,
slightly out, but just not as outwards
as you like a lot of people naturally
point their toes outwards. It's nice and
comfortable. I say that's the path of
least resistance. There's a saying with
equipped powerlifting. The path of least
resistance is the path of least
assistance. Right? So that's least
resistance. This is increasing
resistance. It increases the tension.
And as you come down, it's like you're
really tight, tight, tight, like a bow
and arrow increasing tension. Then boom,
gives you a big powerful explosion
from the bottom of the squat. So,
there's a quick little tip for you for
your squats with your squat stance, but
you can implement
today. Now, we're going to do singles
all the way. So, this is
quite heavy feeling on my back cuz I
don't have my shoulder blades back,
right?
All right. So, what's today? Today I'm
giving myself 60 total minutes to train.
And what I'm going to do, this squat
session is not really going to be hugely
stimulating in terms of strength gain or
muscle gain because it's going to be not
that heavy. And I'm not going to do a
huge amount of volume. I'm probably just
going to do one top set of three. Now,
that doesn't bother me so much because I
know that next week, this is an
investment for next week. Next week it's
going to feel a lot better and I'm going
to be able to get more sets in and more
weight in and then it's going to start
becoming stimulating. But either way, I
mean I could be doing more sets, but
today I'm in a rush because I got my
seminar. But what I'm actually going to
do after this is do my leg press kind of
like hypertrophy style session when you
are on a time limit. This is how I was
training when I was traveling over to
Canada with Thor when I was coaching him
for strongest man on earth. That was in
uh in Colorado, but we were in Canada
when we're doing that. Now, I would
coach him and it's like I can't train
myself at the same time as him. So, I'm
coaching him. I'm wrapping his knees.
He's doing his big session and I'm with
him the whole time. And then while he's
doing his accessories, I had to rush to
get any type of leg training in. And
what I did was just leg press. But the
way I did my leg press was high high
reps and you know two to three top sets
and that was it. Why is high high reps
important? And why am I telling you
this? Because a lot of the times, so
this is where we use the research. So
Brad Shfeld's research where they found
as a meta analysis where they found for
hypertrophy you can achieve equal amount
of hypertrophy with a very broad rep
range. So between 5 to 30 rep range they
found that there was not any difference
at all with how much muscle mass you
built as long as those sets were taken
to the same proximity to failure. That
means as long as you pretty much trained
close to fail didn't matter if you did
30 reps or five reps. Now, the argument
against that, which I argue as well, is
that doesn't mean you should go and do
30 reps of squats because the muscle
that you're targeting needs to be the
limiting factor of the movement. Or in
other words, the reason why you failed
first. And if you do 30 reps on a squat,
you're not failing first because your
quadriceps can't squat any more reps.
It's usually because your cardiovascular
system's given way or your low back is
screaming at you or something that's
different to the target muscles. So, you
need to make sure if you're doing that
high rep set, you're positioning
yourself in a way that the muscle that
you're targeting is the muscle that
fails first. So in a leg press or any
other machines, that's why machines
really come in handy for your high rep
sets. So the the next benefit of doing a
high rep set on a leg press is when it's
high reps, the weight is low, which
doesn't take as much time to warm up to
your top set. So whenever I'm doing a
heavy session, it takes me forever just
to warm up to the top set. But when
you're doing a set of 30, all you really
need is two warm-up sets and then you're
on. Anyway, uh back to my safety bar.
I'm up to this. This looks like 120, but
it's actually 130 because the bar is
30 kg,
man. 130 kg, but it feels very heavy
because it's that unfamiliar pattern.
It's the reason why I've been putting
this movement off for so long. It's cuz
I know it's going to be hard. But
anyway, I also know how beneficial it's
going to be when I start getting to my
top end strengths with my squats
because
one of the hardest things you can do
with squatting when you're getting good
is do it a lot cuz it hurts your arms.
Well, for me, it hurts my arms and a lot
of other powerlters, it hurts their arms
as well. It's a very common thing to get
soreness in the elbows, discomfort in
the shoulders, and all of these things
with squats. A lot of people try and
figure out the cure for why does it hurt
here? They call it biceps tendinitis or
I call it penis elbow. Right? So this is
where I don't actually know the cure for
this. A lot of people say that they know
it. They've got whatever stretch or
mobility drill for their shoulders. Yet
at the highest level it still keeps
happening. So I'll tell you what my cure
is. One conditioning.
So over the years of squatting gradually
your body will adapt. And that's
something that happens with me as well.
I don't get the same type of pain. The
next thing is intelligent approach to
your programming. So when you program
heavy squats week after week, multiple
times per week, uh that's accumulating a
lot of volume in that position and that
doesn't give your arms much time to
recover. So this is why there's
different programming strategies where
you can do things like alternate. This
is my favorite method that I'm going to
be getting to alternating between low
bar squats and safety squats in my
training program. So if you're squatting
once a week, you can do it like that.
once with a barbell, then the next week
with the safety bar. So, you're giving
your arms two weeks rest from that
barbell. Or the way that I'm doing it is
I'm squatting two times per week. Once
is low bar, once is safety bar. Right
now, this is my investment into the
future. I'm not going to be able to lift
very heavy here. That's fine because
eventually I'm going to 150 kg, one rep.
It feels so heavy. It feels so heavy.
In my head, I have the top set of four
blues. But when I'm warming up, I'm just
thinking, "Oh my goodness, if that feels
heavy, imagine an extra blue plate on
each side. That's going to feel so
hard." But anyway, when I stand up with
it, it's like, oh, I feel like that came
up pretty pretty easily. So, you know
what I'm going to do? I'm going to get
my trusty friend, which is my tripod,
and I'm going to record my sets so that
I can remind myself to stop being such a
and look at myself doing it. When
I go, "Oh, that feels so hard." And then
I look at myself doing it. It's like,
"You're being a bro. You're being
a bro." Oh, no way. Thor Bjönson.
So Thor just pulled 505 kg and we're
programming him to be able to do 510 kg
in 6 weeks time. And look what he just
messaged me. Elon Musk
said, "Congratulations on X." Elon Musk.
Wow. Congrats.
Oh my god. How funny is that? I saw
Arnold Schwarzenegger commented on his
post, but you know, Thor knows Arnold.
So good. Enough of that. Enough
of that. Hey, I'm pretty excited for
that 505. I'm going to put out a YouTube
video talking today about how how good
it was, but it was also not the best
circumstances for him to do it. He had
to change his technique and he still got
it. All right. Uh, so this looks like
160 cuz it's three and a half plates,
but it's 30 kilo bar, so it's 170. Did I
press record on my phone?
It's heavy.
If it's actually heavy or am I being a
I'm being silly.
Stop being silly. Sometimes you should
just stop being silly. You know what I
mean? I'm going to stick to my plan. and
do the four blue plates each side. Four
blue plates. I'm going to tell you how
it feels. It's going to feel heavy.
It's going to feel heavy.
We on. I'm expecting this to be the top
set. My plan was to do a triple.
Oh man.
Yeah. I mean, you stand up three times.
It's fine. That was damn hard.
Let me just see.
That was supposed to be pause. That
looked like zero pause.
That looked like one quarter of a pause.
And that looked like
one quarter of a pause. Anyway, who's
counting? Who's counting? Anyway,
whatever. Technique session. Next up.
Okay, leg press. This is my favorite.
So, the way that I'm doing that flat
sold shoe. I mean, the technique is not
amazing. I'm looking at myself doing it.
It's like I'd like to use the same
stance that I would use for my low bar
squat, which positions me in a way that
that movement is is hip dominant. So, I
like to with my programs, you guys, I
hope you're following. I'm going to keep
on dropping these bombs for you so you
understand programming at the highest
level. So, with my programs on squat
day, I like to consider two different
types of squat patterns. Hip dominant
and knee dominant. And what I like to do
regardless of the athlete, regardless of
the phase, I like to factor in both. So
that means right now I did a hip
dominant squat pattern to start the
session. Then if we're to add accessory
exercises to the equation, which most
people do and I'm about to do that now,
don't do more hip dominant stuff. You've
already done enough of that. So if
you're starting with hip dominant, the
secondary work should be quad dominant.
So hip dominant means I'm positioning
myself to use my strong hips. So that's
a low bar squat, you know, wider stance.
The wider the stance, the more you use
your hips. So that's adductors, glutes
back as well, right? So this is this is
hip dominant squat. More hip bend but
not much knee bend. So therefore, don't
do more hip dominant squat patterns
afterwards. So what are hip dominant
squat patterns? The way that you
normally do a leg press, which is kind
of like feet high, it's a very hip
dominant movement. Long stride lunges,
that's hip dominant. So don't go hip
dominant and then more hip dominant.
That's redundant. You've already
targeted those muscles and you should
have done them. I mean today that wasn't
very good. So I've got a justification.
That's just technique session. But you
should do it hard enough in the first
exercise to not need to do in the
second. The next exercise I'm going to
do is knee dominance. So this is where I
do a lot of stiletto squats or the way
I'm going to position myself on my leg
press. So this is a typical leg press,
hip dominant, right? So that's
pretty much the stance that I just used
then when I did my squat. So I'm not
going to do more of that here. So this
is how I do a
quad dominant squat. feet low and
pushing through the balls of my feet
just like how I do it on a stiletto
squat. Except now because it's
the leg press, there's different rules
with rep ranges. So when you say how
many reps should you be doing on
whatever movement during, you know,
whatever phase. So if you're doing like
hypertrophy phase, you're doing 8 to 12.
If you're doing a strength phase, you're
doing four to six reps. Instead of
thinking about the phase and how many
reps you should be doing through the
phase, think about the movement and how
many reps would be appropriate for that
movement. So for a squat, I consider
from one rep to kind of, you know,
majority of the time up to eight reps.
So more than that is like every now and
then you want to, you know, 10 rep
squats, 12 rep squats. I don't really
program that much. But like for complex
movements, the more complexity, the
higher the risk of technical breakdown
when you do high rep sets. So therefore,
think of the complexity of the movement
for a squat. One to eight reps.
Beautiful. Even during a hypertrophy
phase, for a hypertrophy phase for
squats, I'm doing between like five to
eight reps for my squat pattern. But
then for a leg press, the room for error
technical breakdown on the later reps is
not going to happen because you're
locked in position. Your technique is
not going to change. You're just going
to keep pushing up and down and up and
down. So therefore, higher reps are now
more suitable. And in my opinion, low
reps are not for me anyway. Some people
like to do low rep leg press and go
super heavy. But for me, I'll tell you
now, I feel like my head is going to
explode when I do that. So, I just don't
like it. So, for me, my leg press is
usually 12 reps to kind of 20 and even
up to 30. Right? So, I'm not going to do
that on squats. So, now let's check this
out. I'm going to warm up really
quickly. I'm just going to do plate,
plate, plate. A couple of reps
to feel the weight.
Can you see my hamstring press against
my calf at the bottom position?
That's the indicator that I'm maximizing
knee bend and making it a quad dominant
squat pattern as opposed to a hip
dominant squat pattern. Right? So,
that's what I'm aiming for. Now, when
you do a leg press like that, it's not
as strong. It's just not. But, it's not
about being strong on all of these
exercises. The objective is you want to
be strong for your main movement, right?
The secondary exercise, you want to
target whatever you neglected in the
main movement.
Although the focus isn't strength, so
the focus is now kind of like leg
hypertrophy. I'll tell you now in my
experience doing this exercise. So this
is the first time whenever I go away, I
don't go on that many holidays. I go
away to coach Thor really. That's the
last times I've ever traveled for long
periods of time, like anywhere between
two to four weeks at a time. I don't get
a huge amount of time to myself to
train. I like to really focus on
training Thor. And when I'm training
him, I don't want to be, you know,
loading his plates and helping him and
giving him all my energy and then coming
off and doing a set in between his sets.
I don't have the energy. Like, it's
exhausting. So, what I do is I train
separately to him. Now, a lot of the
times I got to the point where it's
like, I can't get a good session in. I'm
just not even going to train, you know?
So, when I'd go over there, I wouldn't
train that much, like maybe once or
twice a week, which is terrible. And
then I'd come back to my squats here and
I'd put 60 kg, like literally one plate.
And it was just a chore. It was just
hard and heavy. And it's like, oh my
goodness, I was so strong and now it's
going to take I've had a month
essentially off training. It's going to
take me so much longer to get back.
Anyhow, the last time I went there, this
is what I was doing. And I did this two
times per week. I was doing other
exercises. Well, so I'd alternate
between upper body, lower body, upper
body, lower body. On my lower body days,
it was leg press, two sets of 30 reps,
not even heavy. Upper body, I'd be doing
something like two sets of like I'd do
one set of bench press because that's
easy for me to warm up to, and then one
set of dumbbell press. Take it to fail.
Not much, right? Anyway, what did I find
from here? When I came back, my strength
was I came back on the first session
expecting it to be very, very weak cuz I
hadn't really touched barbell squats.
And I came back on my first session, you
know, I just I like to just feel it.
That's exactly how I just warmed up
there. I just go 20 kg jumps. So I did
60 kg for five, it was fine. 80 kg,
fine, it was fine. 100 kg, not bad.
Anyway, on my first session back, I got
up to 180 kg on my squats after not even
putting a barbell on my back for a
month. And it kind of made me realize
how effective it was to do high rep
work, quad dominant in a leg press, and
the carryover that it had for my squat
strength. So, this is something that I
like to include for myself as well. So,
when you're really working on quads or
when you're really working on your squat
strength, here's a common question. Why
do my hips shoot up first when I do a
squat? So, a lot of the times your hips
shoot up first because you want to
use your hips more because it's a
stronger structure, right? So, when
you're doing a low bar squat, a lot of
the times at the highest level, that's
what you might see. And if that's you at
home, that's probably why. It's because
it's strong. It's not because you're a
bad person and you've got shitty
technique. But it doesn't mean that you
shouldn't work towards fixing that. How
do I fix it? It's not just about, so a
lot of people say the cue chest up. So
you're doing this, it's like chest up.
It's like, damn you, I'm trying to put
my chest up. It just won't go up because
it's damn heavy on my back. So what you
want to do is position yourself in a
way. If you ever have a look at
weightlifters, they don't do that. They
don't do with their heels like this, but
they kind of are that's their torso
angle when they when they do their high
bar squats and their front squats. They
are upright. It's not because wow,
you've got such great technique. It's
because you've trained yourself in ways
to have such damn strong quads. So now
when you squat, that's your strong part.
So for me, when I squat, my hips are my
strong part. That's why I'll use them
more. But for weightlifterss, they spend
so much damn time strengthening their
quadriceps that that's their stronger
structure. And therefore, they want to
use their stronger structure when they
squat heavy. Here's something that I
know. When I include quad dominant work,
it makes my low bar squats more upright.
It corrects that hip kind of driving up
first, that deviation. Strengthen your
quads by positioning yourself in a way
to target your quads, such as this
exercise here, which is forcing myself
to maximize my knee bend and use quads
rather than hips.
So, including that in my squat program
always now. Well, not just that other
hip other quad dominant pattern. So,
between that and my stiletto squats,
that's where I start going to my top
squats like my last my most recent heavy
squat was 300 kg. And actually, my hips
didn't shoot up first. They came up at
the same time as my shoulders. So, my
torso angle was pretty damn good. Why is
that? Well, it's because I've been
squatting for many, many years. But it's
also because I look at weak point
training and if my quadriceps were once
my weak point, I make sure I'm always
doing so much quadricep work in my
training so that when I come back to my
low bar squats, I'm in the perfect
position. I mean, ideally, if there's
technical breakdown,
no one's perfect, right? But yeah, when
you when you're testing your max and you
look for the technical breakdowns and it
just gets on keeps on getting better and
better with time, it's because you're
strengthening those weak points. So
there's my weak point training is quad
work. Let's see what Thor had to say.
[Applause]
[Music]
All right. So, 20 reps on that. I'll
tell you something about programming.
You should be for hypertrophy work, you
want to take it close to fail. Was that
close to fail? Well, it felt pretty damn
hard. But there were definitely more
reps in reserve. And this is something
that happens. I haven't done high rep
sets on leg press in months. So the the
feeling of high rep set, taking it to
fail is unfamiliar at this point because
it's week one. I haven't done it in such
a long time. That's something else that
you need to do is familiarize yourself.
So this is why I like to periodize my
effort. So if I'm doing a four-weekly
plan, week one should be easy, week two
harder, week three starts getting hard,
week four really hard. The reason why we
start conservative is also to
familiarize yourself with what it feels
like to be pushing hard because that's
very difficult, very challenging. But
I'll tell you something will happen from
week to week. My conditioning for these
movements are going to improve. my pain
tolerance is also going to improve. My
understanding of feeling, yeah, I did 20
and that was hard, but there's more in
the tank for sure. But either way, that
was hard. And my quads feel jacked. They
feel like they're pretty pumped. I'm
just going to do one more set. And
that's my session. And I'm justifying
two things. One, I'm making it a quick
session because I've got my seminar to
do and I don't have a huge amount of
time. But it's convenient for me because
it's week one of the new phase. And I
always say to start week one of a new
phase conservatively to allow room for
progression from week to week. So that's
me. That's my session. I'm going to do
one more set when I catch my breath. I'm
going to give myself about 8 minutes
rest. So it's a long recovery so I can
still factor in I want it to be a higher
quality set. So, I don't think I'll be
fully recovered in 4 minutes or 5
minutes, which is what a lot of people
recommend for hypertrophy workouts and
longer rest periods for strength
workouts because they say performance
matters for strength, but it doesn't
matter so much for hypertrophy. Now, I
disagree. I think that hypertrophy
performance does matter for hypertrophy.
So, therefore, even on my hypertrophy
sessions, I'm still factoring in long
rest periods so that I can have high
quality, high rep sets taken close to
failure. So, I'm going to give myself
eight good minutes and then I'm going to
do one more set of 20 and then I'm done
and then I'm going to get ready for the
day. Anyway, that was short and sweet. I
hope you enjoyed that session. I'll see
you guys next